--- Page 3 Text ---
typically references Green and Brock (2000), whose research was the
first to develop and validate a narrative transportation scale and
provide evidence that, through narrative transportation, stories can
influence audience beliefs. This finding suggested that stories are
uniquely persuasive, and thus narrative transportation theory quickly
became popular with marketing academic researchers.
As the theory developed and grew in popularity, different
terminology was employed to refer to narrative transportation
theory. In the context of advertising, some authors refer to the
process through which narrative transportation can influence beliefs
as narrative persuasion (e.g., Appel, 2022; Hamby & Brinberg, 2016).
Narrative processing is also used interchangeably with narrative
transportation (e.g., Bublitz et al., 2016; Hung et al., 2017); it refers to
the way consumers process stories (which is encompassed by the
original theory: Green & Brock, 2000). When authors use this
terminology, they still rely on the same underlying tenets of narrative
transportation theory. As such, we counted these articles as relying
on narrative transportation theory. We also included the extended
transportation‐imagery model (van Laer et al., 2014) in this category.
This model extends narrative transportation theory to incorporate a
more complete set of antecedents, moderators, and consequences
(van Laer et al., 2014).
Notably, narrative transportation theory does not explain how or
why it is so persuasive. Thus, to elucidate the persuasive process,
researchers often integrate narrative transportation theory with other
persuasion theories which are discussed in subsequent sections.
4.1.2
|
Dual‐processing models
This category includes articles that mention the elaboration likelihood
model, the heuristic systematic model, or dual‐processing theory more
generally. Dual‐processing theories describe how consumers can process
information via two different paths, such as the central or peripheral
paths for the elaboration likelihood model (ELM: Petty et al., 1983) or
heuristic or systematic processing for the heuristic systematic model
(HSM: Chaiken, 1980). Early work (e.g., Escalas, 2004; Green & Brock,
2000) suggested that narrative transportation did not adhere to a
traditional dual‐processing model. If narrative transportation took the
form of processing associated with passive processing (such as the
peripheral path of the ELM or heuristic processing of the HSM), then less
critical analysis of the message in the story would be expected and
resulting attitudes should be weakly held and relatively easy to change. If
narrative transportation took the form of processing associated with
FIGURE 1
Sampling methodology. (Paul
et., 2017; Paul & Rosado‐Serrano, 2019).
THOMAS and GRIGSBY
|
1807
 15206793, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mar.22011 by Univ of California Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Wiley Online Library on [09/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- Page 4 Text ---
more active processing (such as the central path of the ELM or systematic
processing of the HSM), then more critical thought would be expected
and the resulting persuasion that occurred should be long‐lasting and
more difficult to change (Shaffer et al., 2018). Researchers have found
that narrative transportation was associated with a surprising combination
of effects. Despite being persuasive, narrative transportation does not
appear to involve much critical thought, counterarguing, or analytical
processing of the message contained in the story (Escalas, 2004; Shaffer
et al., 2018). Researchers have also found that the motivation to process
the message, an important antecedent to the ELM, does not influence
outcomes when narrative transportation occurs (Huang et al., 2022).
Two reviewed articles examine situations in which narrative
transportation can be reduced and consumers will shift their
processing approach to better fit in with the predictions made by
dual‐processing models. Appel (2022) used a manipulative intent
warning before showing consumers a story, successfully reducing
narrative
transportation
while
eliciting
affective
resistance
to
persuasion. Furthermore, Tezer et al. (2022) found that when
perceived risk was high, consumers avoided narrative transportation
and instead engaged in analytical processing.
4.1.3
|
Persuasion knowledge model
The persuasion knowledge model (PKM: Friestad & Wright, 1994) argues
that as consumers learn and have consumption experiences, they develop
an understanding of common persuasive practices as well as coping
strategies to resist the persuasive effects of such tactics. Our review
found several instances where the PKM was integrated with narrative
transportation. In some cases, cues that activate persuasion knowledge
can have a negative influence on persuasive effects, but in other cases,
narrative transportation can overcome the negative effects of persuasion
knowledge and still be effective.
Perceptions of manipulative intent are one way in which the
persuasiveness of stories can be lost (Appel, 2022; Wentzel et al., 2010),
as perceptions of manipulative intent reduce narrative transportation. The
story format can activate persuasion knowledge in some consumers and,
as a result, consumers become skeptical and more critical of the message,
reducing its effectiveness (Gilliam & Flaherty, 2015). Similarly, Yıldız and
Sever (2022) find that high brand presence in a narrative video ad reduces
persuasive outcomes. Other research supports the argument that when
consumers feel connected to the brand, message source, or product,
narrative transportation will minimize persuasion knowledge effects. For
example, the presence of a brand as the source of the message
(compared to independent sources such as trade publications) generally
increases persuasion knowledge; however, this effect is mitigated when
narrative transportation is high (Tezer et al., 2020). Likewise, Feng and
colleagues (2021) explore influencer advertising and find that, contrary to
expectations, the presence of a sponsorship disclosure label did not
significantly influence persuasive outcomes, which the authors attribute
to narrative transportation. Kim (2022) finds a similar effect in a
pharmaceutical advertising context. When influencers disclosed personal
information, persuasion knowledge was reduced, and narrative transpor-
tation increased compared to when influencers did not disclose.
4.1.4
|
Social cognitive theory
Social cognitive theory states that consumers are most likely to have high
self‐efficacy concerning a new behavior and more likely to adopt the new
behavior when it is demonstrated by an influential peer rather than simply
recommended (Bandura, 2001). Because narrative transportation can
mimic a real experience due to activation of imagination, empathy, and
identification with the story characters, researchers suggest that
narratives that depict behaviors (e.g., alcohol consumption: Redondo
et al., 2018; domestic violence interventions: El‐Khoury & Shafer, 2016;
purchase decisions: Kang et al., 2020) can influence consumers to engage
in the depicted behaviors. Researchers argue that social cognition may
occur as part of the narrative transportation process (e.g., Kang
et al., 2020), or it may have a direct influence on consumers regardless
of the level of narrative transportation (e.g., Redondo et al., 2018). El‐
Khoury and Shafer (2016) uncovered a boundary condition such that
narrative ads were more effective for those consumers who did not have
experience with the behavior.
TABLE 1
List of theories used in two or more articles in sample.
Theory
Seminal article | example
articlea
Count
Narrative transportation
theory
Green & Brock (2000) |
Appel (2022)
95
Dual processing models
Petty et al. (1983) | Shaffer
et al. (2018)
8
Persuasion knowledge
model
Friestad & Wright (1994) |
Kim (2022)
6
Social cognitive theory
Bandura (2001) | Kang
et al. (2020)
4
Associative network theory
Collins & Loftus (1975) |
Avramova et al. (2017)
3
Cognitive capacity theory
Isen & Daubman (1984) | Sar
& Rodriguez (2019)
2
Entertainment overcoming
resistance model
Moyer‐Gusã & Nabi (2010) |
Krakow et al. (2018)
2
Exemplification theory
Zillmann (1999) | El‐Khoury &
Shafer (2016)
2
Identification theory
Cohen, 2018 | Dessart (2018)
2
Psychological reactance
theory
Brehm (1966) | Lillie
et al. (2022)
2
Social identity theory
Hogg & Turner (1987) | Van
den Hende et al. (2012)
2
Taylor's strategy wheel
Taylor (1999) | Sharma &
Meena (2024)
2
aThe seminal article represents a well‐established article on the noted
theory that future researchers can use for source material. The example
article is an article from our sample that employs the noted theory.
1808
|
THOMAS and GRIGSBY
 15206793, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mar.22011 by Univ of California Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Wiley Online Library on [09/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- Page 5 Text ---
4.1.5
|
Associative network theory
Associative network theory is used to describe how consumers store
and access information in memory, suggesting that information is
stored in the form of nodes that are connected via links (Collins &
Loftus, 1975). New information is stored in memory with related
nodes, and during recall, consumers access nodes and related nodes
via spreading activation. Researchers argue that associative network
theory can work in combination with narrative transportation theory
to improve persuasive outcomes. For example, repeated exposure to
brand information, whether through repeated mention of an unfamiliar
brand (Avramova et al., 2017) or information presented across
different media forms (Granitz & Forman, 2015), should improve
persuasive
outcomes.
Narrative
transportation, due
to reduced
counterarguing and increased cognitive effort, further enhances these
outcomes (Avramova et al., 2017; Wang & Shen, 2019).
4.2
|
Concepts
Given the systematic literature review parameters, every article in our
sample discussed either narrative transportation as a theory and/or
construct. However, that does not mean that every quantitative
manuscript reviewed incorporated narrative transportation as a variable
interest. Of the 83 articles that incorporated quantitative methods into
some aspect of the study design, 27.7% (n = 23) did not formally measure
or manipulate narrative transportation. Rather, the literature on narrative
transportation provided theoretical support for their conceptualization. As
such, the narrative transportation literature was employed to make
predictions about related, but distinct constructs such as narrative self‐
referencing, imagination proclivity, or immersion.
Of the research that included narrative transportation as a construct
in the study design (n = 60), narrative transportation was almost
exclusively measured (98%). Regardless of whether it was manipulated
or measured, narrative transportation was treated as a mediator in 66.7%
of the articles, a dependent variable in 11.6% of the articles, an
independent variable in 10% of the articles, a moderator in 8.3% of the
articles, and an alternative explanation or covariate in 3.3% of the articles.
Three of the manuscripts examining narrative transportation did so in the
context of scale development (Bennett et al., 2023; Campbell et al., 2023;
Yueh & Zheng, 2019), while one examined narrative transportation as an
individual difference variable (Brechman & Purvis, 2015).
In Figure 2, we depict the empirical framework, illustrating the
overarching relationships examined in our sample. Below we discuss
the primary variables of interest and ways in which these variables
can be categorized.
4.2.1
|
Antecedents
The antecedents of narrative transportation can be classified into
three primary categories: storyteller, consumer, and medium char-
acteristics. In a previous review (van Laer et al., 2014), antecedents
were classified into two categories: storyteller characteristics and
story‐receiver characteristics (discussed here as consumer character-
istics). Storyteller characteristics include aspects of the story (e.g.,
plot, brands, etc.) and the characters involved, while consumer
characteristics include variables unique to the consumer as opposed
to
the
persuasive
information.
Medium
characteristics
include
aspects
of
the
medium
(e.g.,
visual,
verbal,
etc.)
that
affect
transportation. See Table 2 for a complete list of antecedents.
Starting with storyteller characteristics, the most frequently
explored antecedent is the narrative nature of the information (n = 9),
e.g., presenting the information in a story format as compared to an
expository (e.g., Wentzel et al., 2010) or list (e.g., Schweitzer & Van
den Hende, 2017) format. Presenting information in a story format is
more likely to elicit narrative transportation, which is consistent with
the prevailing conceptualization that the elements of a story are a
FIGURE 2
Framework of relationships included in review of narrative transportation.
THOMAS and GRIGSBY
|
1809
 15206793, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mar.22011 by Univ of California Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Wiley Online Library on [09/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- Page 6 Text ---
necessary, but not sufficient condition of narrative transportation
(van Laer et al., 2014). Other attributes of the information (e.g.,
disclosure: Kim, 2022; movement: Grigsby et al., 2023) are also found
to influence narrative transportation. Further, many of the storyteller
characteristics can be further classified as attributes specific to the
brand (e.g., brand attributes: McFerran et al., 2010; brand placement:
Yıldız & Sever, 2022) or attributes of the character (e.g., character
gaze: To & Patrick, 2021; narrative perspective: Kim, 2022) that is
presented in the persuasive information. These studies identify
tactics that marketers can employ to “pull” consumers into the story,
enhancing the likelihood that they will be transported.
Consumer characteristics fall into three broad categories: individual
differences, states, and judgments. Consumer individual differences
include demographic information (e.g., age and education: Neil et al., 2019)
and consumer traits (e.g., technological reflectiveness: Schweitzer & Van
den Hende, 2017; fantasy proneness: Chen, 2015). Conversely, consumer
states, which are temporary, have also been shown to affect narrative
transportation and include variables such as imagination (Grigsby
et al., 2023), message comprehension (Glaser & Reisinger, 2022), and
mental simulation (Escalas, 2004). Finally, consumer judgments include
perceptions about user control (Oh et al., 2020), perceived realism
(Redondo et al., 2018), and feelings of spatial presence (Ma, 2020).
Understanding the effect of consumer characteristics on narrative
transportation helps marketers to know who is susceptible to transporta-
tion and influences targeting efforts.
Finally, medium characteristics focus on elements of the medium that
facilitate or inhibit transportation. The style of a demonstration (Ringler
et al., 2024), the ability to interact with the medium (Oh et al., 2020), and
the type of medium (Luna‐Nevarez, 2021) can influence the extent to
which consumers experience narrative transportation. Less research has
explored the influence of medium characteristics compared to the other
categories we reviewed. We discuss potential areas for research advances
related to medium characteristics in Section 5.3.
4.2.2
|
Outcomes
The examination of the outcomes of narrative transportation can be
broadly viewed as those that are context‐general (e.g., beliefs about
TABLE 2
Antecedents of narrative transportation and their
effecta on narrative transportation.
Storyteller characteristics
Attributes of the story/information
Anthropomorphism
+
Disclosure
+
Foreshadowing
+
Guilt appeal
+
Movement in ad
+
Moving music
+
Narrative presentation of information
+
Narrative self‐referencing
+
Product‐story link
+
Attributes of the brand
Brand prominence
−
Desirable brand attributes
+
Presence of slogan
+
Attributes of the character
Averted gaze
+
Narrative perspective
+
Consumer characteristics
Individual differences
Age
−
Cognitive flow
+
Education
+
Empathy bias
+
Fantasy proneness
+
Fashion involvement
+
Product expertise/knowledge
+
Technological reflectiveness
+
States
Character perspective‐taking
+
Comprehension
+
Fantasy passport
+
Feelings of enjoyment
+
Imagination
+
Mental simulation
+
Judgments
Identification with characters/story
+
Perceptions of advertising
+
Perceived contingency
+
Perceptions of spatial presence
+
TABLE 2
(Continued)
Consumer characteristics
Perceptions of user control
+
Perceived realism
+
Medium Characteristics
Graphic presentation format
+
Interactivity of information
+
Process demonstration
+
aThe column on the right signifies whether the effect on narrative
transportation was either positive or negative.
1810
|
THOMAS and GRIGSBY
 15206793, 2024, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mar.22011 by Univ of California Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Wiley Online Library on [09/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

